.. _SerialEM_note_more_about_XY_positioning:

SerialEM Note: More About X,Y Positioning
=========================================

:Author: Chen Xu
:Contact: <chen.xu@umassmed.edu>
:Date-Created: Dec 12, 2019
:Last-Updated: Nov 22, 2020

.. glossary::

   Abstract
      Robust positioning to the target position is critical for high level
      operation of CryoEM data collection. In this note, I like to share my
      own version of the latest script to perform X,Y positioning task. And
      I try to explain every line of the code and ideas behind them as well. 
      
      I have spent a lot of time thinking and testing about this. If you
      have better and different ideas, I'd love to hear from you. 
      
      
.. _script:

The script lines 
----------------

The script is fairly short, as shown below. It can be inserted in beginning
of a single particle data collection script. 

.. code-block:: ruby
   :linenos:
   :caption: X,Y positioning

    buffer = T
    RealignToNavItem 0
    ResetImageShift 2
    #Copy A $buffer     #comment out if a fixed template in $buffer is used.  
    AcquireToMatchBuffer $buffer
    AlignTo $buffer 0 1

.. _explain:

Explanations Line by Line
-------------------------

.. code-block:: ruby

    buffer = T
    
This is to define which buffer will be used to store reference image, a
whole image or a cropped area of an image.  Buffer after N are all beyond
rolling range, thus won't be pushed out by taking too many images. 

.. code-block:: ruby

    RealignToNavItem 0

``RealignToNavItem`` is one of the most important functions in **SerialEM**,
in my opinion. It will bring the specimen stage to a valid map item. It
typically uses combination of stage shift and image shift to get the job
done. ``0`` here means to stay in the condition from which the map was
created. For example, the map was generated using LD **View**, and the scope
currently is at LD **R**, the scope will switch to the View mag, beam
intensity etc.. After *realign* is done, it stays in View mag. Argument
``1`` will bring scope back to **R**, after routine finishes. 

This command line will bring the specimen to the picked item position, with
some image shift in the last image of the routine takes, in buffer A. 

I should point out that this perhaps reflects one of the most fundamental
differences between SerialEM and other data collection software - it doesn't
rely on fixed template at all. As long as an item in a valid map is defined
(picked), **SerialEM** will drive the stage there! For example, for a lacey
grid with no regular size holes, SerialEM can go to the target positions
precisely wherever they are defined as point items. 

.. code-block:: ruby

    ResetImageShift 2

``ResetImageShift`` is to clear out any image shift existing in the system
and use stage shift to compensate. Then, there is no image shift, which
means beam is straight down on the axis. However, the intrinsic inaccuracy
of stage movement makes target being slightly off, more or less.  

The argument ``2`` here means stage will clear the backlash by moving to
opposite direction for 0.025 microns as default. This can be very useful to
slow down the stage drifting after moving to a new location. Low drift is a
very good thing since there is no way to correct drifts accumulated within a
frame. This is particularly true if one has to use long frame time on some
camera system. 

.. code-block:: ruby

  #Copy A $buffer
  
If not commented out, this line will copy the last image (after realign) in
buffer A to a target buffer (T in this case). If one uses a fix image, for
example, a cropped hole as reference image, then it should be manually copy
into T and leave this line commented out. 

.. code-block:: ruby

    AcquireToMatchBuffer $buffer    

This is a new command, available in 3.8 beta Dec 10, 2019 built and later.
It does two things: 1) take a shot using the exact condition of what in the
reference buffer for mag, beam condition, binning, exposure time etc.; 2)
make the final image the same size as what in the reference buffer, by
cropping if necessary. I used to have to do this in a lengthy script using
two functions. 

.. code-block:: ruby

   AlignTo $buffer 0 1
   
Simply align the image in buffer A to reference buffer. This would make the
target right on again with image shift. The very last argument ``1`` means
no trimming to any of the source image and reference image. This is needed
for UltrAuFoilÂ® Holey Gold Films grids which have very "dark" region of the
film. 

.. thoughts:

Other thoughts
--------------

1. It is helpful to use large defocus offset for map and realigning, as the
contrast is significantly better. On our Krios, we use -300um for View
offset (in LD). 

2. If offset is more than 200um, it most likely needs High-def Mag
calibration. With this, system dynamically interpolates the stage shift
matrix which is calibrated using near-focus condition. This makes stage
movement much more accurate and robust.

3. If possible, use whole image as "dynamic" template instead of sub-area. Using
sub-area such as a single hole is a quick workaround for a grid which has
periodic feature and 5-point way of picking points might be not very
accurate due to local geometry variation. 
