.. _SerialEM_speed_speed_speed:

SerialEM Note: Speed, Speed and Speed
=====================================

:Author: Chen Xu
:Contact: <chen.xu@umassmed.edu>
:Created: 2017-12-26
:Updated: 2022-02-19

.. glossary::

   Abstract
      Speed of data collection is important, specially for a facility runnig
      24/7 and for whole year long. If we can save a few seconds for an
      exposure, which might not sound much, it becomes a lot accumulated in
      a year time. We could collect more data, help more users if we are
      more efficient.  
      
      Thanks to the author and developer, David Mastronade, SerialEM is
      always under active development and improvement. I believe efficiency
      has been one of the goals for development. For example, positioning
      routine - Realign earlier always run two rounds: first round to align
      to the center of a map or a center of a piece of a map; and second
      round to align to the actual target. Later version of SerialEM can
      skip the first round of center align if it is done recently. This
      saves huge mount of time for single particle application. 
      
      In this document, I want to mention a few tips which you might or
      might not be aware of. Some of the things are related to newly added
      features of SerialEM. Some are from my personal experience. It would
      make me happy if they can also save you a few seconds.
      
.. _minimize_mag_switch:

Minimize Mag Switch 
-------------------

Switching between mags takes time. You can definitely feel the slowness of
mag switching, say between 1250X and 130kX. You might think of turning off
some lens normalization via FEI interface, but I always worry the stability
of the system might suffer. I am not trying to save time from there. 

However, I found that I could save time from this positioning actions:

.. code-block:: ruby

   RealignToNavItem 1
   Copy A P
   ResetImageShift
   
   View
   AlignTo P
   ResetImageShift
   
This little script uses the last image of Realign routine which has some
image shift in it, as reference to do another round of aligning and
*ResetImageShift* to get rid of image shift. It seems to be flawless and it is
actually working. But I noticed the scope switched from View mag to Record
mag for short period of time and then switch to View mag again during the
actions. There is an extra switch there! At first, I was very puzzled, then
I realized that I had been using a wrong command! 

The problem is caused by the argument 1 in command line:

.. code-block:: ruby

   RealignToNavItem 1
   
The argument "1" here means scope will resume to the state before realigning
routine. And that state is high, record mag from exposure of last navigator
point. Therefore, with above script, scope switch to View mag to perform
realign function and then it switches back to record mag. It then switches to
View mag again when at line of 

.. code-block:: ruby

   View
   
If I put "0" as argument for "RealignToNavItem" like here:

.. code-block:: ruby

  RealignToNavItem 0
  
then scope stays in View mag. It at least saves 5 seconds! 

.. _order_of_actions:

Order of Actions
----------------

When we use "Acquire at points ..." to collect single particle data, the
default action of control mechanism is to move stage to the new item's stage
position. And then it starts to run the actual collecting script like "LD".
If the first action in the "LD" script is RealignToNavItem, the scope
changes to the map mag, usually is View mag. Therefore, there are two
physical actions here involved - stage move and mag switch. 

For whatever reason, before stage movement finishes, scope can not do
anything. Since "RealignToNavItem" will also introduce stage movement, if we
ask RealignToNavItem to take care of mag switching and stage movement, it
can move stage while mag switching is happening. This can initiate two
actions at the same time; therefore, saves time. 

This is new feature added not long ago. In late versions, there is a check
box "Skip initial stage move" in "Navigator Acquire Dialog" window for this
very purpose. 

.. _using_beam_tilt_for_Z:

Using Beam Tilt for Z Height Change
-----------------------------------

We all know how important is to have Z height close enough to eucentricity.
If there is 10 micron off, then everything won't work quite right.
SerialEM's built-in function "Eucentricity" is a robust function,
straightforward to use. However, it takes some time to run due to stage
tilting and settling time required. I wrote two scripts (functions) "Z_byG"
and "Z_byV" to use beam tilting pair for the same job. They do not use stage
tilt and takes less images, therefore, it runs faster. You do have to get
calibration done for Standard Focus value though. 

In single particle data collection, sometimes, we have to make MMM maps from
many meshes. The very first thing we do after getting to the center of a
mesh is to fix the eucentricity height before map is collected. Using beam
tilting method, it can save bit of time in this process. 

From my own experience, doing the eucentricity using beam tilting method
even works fairly well in low range of magnifications. It seems to be
accurate enough for parallel beam capable scope like Krios. 

.. _relax_stage:

Relaxing Stage After Moving to Target
-------------------------------------

For high quality movie stacks, even we use short frame time, the stage drift
rate is still needed to be monitored. Some people use longer frame time due
to worry the signal within frame being too weak for frame aligning later. In
this case, drift control needs to be in place seriously, as stage naturally
drifts and it can have different speeds at different time. 

SerialEM can ask stage to move with backlash retained or imposed. After such
movement, relaxing stage stress by moving backwards a small distance can
help stage settle down much faster, at least to a normal behaviour stage.
This feature has been implemented into SeriaEM now. I have found it saves us
huge mount of time for our routine data collection. I strongly recommend to
upgrade to later version for this reason. 

The feature is used this way:

.. code-block:: ruby

   ResetImageShift 2 
   
2 means moving stage with backlash imposed or retained, and moving backward
25nm distance in the end. This small distance doesn't actually move the
stage location, but helps relax the stage mechanical stress. You can also
ask to move backwards a different distance by adding 2nd argument to the
command, like below. 

.. code-block:: ruby

   ResetImageShift 2 50
 
This will move 50nm, rather than 25nm as default. 

Moving stage with backlash imposed takes extra time itself. Therefore, we
don't want to move stage always using this way, but the final movement to
the target. Here is a portion of a function called "AlignToBuffer" I wrote. 

.. code-block:: ruby

   ## align
   Loop $iter ind
       $shot
       # still need crop, for Camera which doesn't do flexible sub-size like FEI cameras
       ImageProperties A
       XA = $reportedValue1
       YA = $reportedValue2
       If $XA > $XP OR $YA > $YP
           echo CallFunction  MyFuncc::CropImageAToBuffer $buffer
           CallFunction  MyFuncs::CropImageAToBuffer $buffer
       Endif
       AlignTo $buffer
       If $ind == $iter  	# last round of loop, relax stage
         ResetImageShift 2
       Else 
         ResetImageShift
       Endif
   EndLoop 
  
Here, I asked stage to relax only at final round of iteration. If you use
this function, you should update it to include this nice feature. 

Alternatively, we can also directly move stage backwards after
ResetImageShift. The idea is if we know the align shift in last image that
is to be cleared out by ResetImageShift command, we know the directions of
stage movement and we just stage backwards a little. This again demonstrates
the powerfulness of flexibility of SerialEM scripting! 

.. code-block:: ruby

   AlignTo $buffer      # comment out this line if last action is RealignToNavItem
   ResetImageShift

   ## relax
   # report shift in buffer A from last round of Align
   # move stage 0.025um in opposite directions
   ReportAlignShift
   shiftX = $repVal5
   shiftY = $repVal6
   
   # just in case it got a blank image so no shift found
   If $shiftX == 0 OR $shiftY == 0
      signX = 0
      signY = 0
   Else
      signX = $shiftX / ABS ( $shiftX )
      signY = $shiftY / ABS ( $shiftY )
   Endif
   
   moveX = -1 * $signX * 0.025
   moveY = -1 * $signY * 0.025
   echo Relaxing ...
   MoveStage $moveX $moveY

This relaxing portion can be put into a function so the script can be neater. 

.. code-block:: ruby

   AlignTo $buffer      # comment out this line if last action is RealignToNavItem
   ResetImageShift
   CallFunction Relax

   Function Relax 0 0
   ## relax
   # report shift in buffer A from last round of Align
   # move stage 0.025um in opposite directions
   ReportAlignShift
   shiftX = $repVal5
   shiftY = $repVal6
   
   # just in case it got a blank image so no shift found
   If $shiftX == 0 OR $shiftY == 0
      signX = 0
      signY = 0
   Else
      signX = $shiftX / ABS ( $shiftX )
      signY = $shiftY / ABS ( $shiftY )
   Endif
   
   moveX = -1 * $signX * 0.025
   moveY = -1 * $signY * 0.025
   echo Relaxing ...
   MoveStage $moveX $moveY
   EndFunction
  
And if you allow final position with a little Image Shift (very OK with coma
compensation in place), then this part positioning can be accurate and
simple:

.. code-block:: ruby

   AlignTo $buffer      # comment out this line if last action is RealignToNavItem
   ResetImageShift
   CallFunction Relax
   AlignTo $buffer      # final round of align to buffer, so position is accurate
   
.. _using_compression:

Using Compression on K2 Data
----------------------------

Most people collect single particle data with K2 camera using
Super-resolution mode. One of the "hidden" advantages is that the Super-res
raw frame data is in 4-bit unsigned integer type, and there are lot of
zero's there. Such data can be compressed very efficiently and losslessly
using mature compression algorithms. Unfortunately, MRC is not a file format
that can directly use those algorithm libraries for compression. TIFF is. 

SerialEM implemented this compression feature in. It gives options not to
apply gain reference before saving and to use compressed TIFF as saved data
format. This might not sound a big deal, but the minimal size of lossless
compressed raw dataset makes huge difference for a facility that runs
constantly. The small dataset file size is not only beneficial for long term
storage, but also makes it a lot faster to transfer and copy off. Network
behaves very differently for a lot of 400MB datasets from a lot of 10GB
datasets. 

Personally, I recommend to use compressed TIFF and without gain
normalization applied for data saving format. 

.. _using_local_drive:

Using Local HDD or SSD
----------------------

It is usually fine to save the frame data directly onto a large size data
storage network system. In our systems, a CIFS mount initiates a network
drive on K2 computer so that we can directly save to that. However, in the
case that the storage system is busy doing some other tasks such as
transferring data to customers, being used by local image processing
programs etc., directly saving to network drive could take extra time than
saving onto local SSD drive on K2 computer. 

In our experience, it is best to save raw data on local SSD or HDD first,
and then align frames using framewatcher (IMOD program) on-the-fly and let
the *framewatcher* move the processed raw frames and aligned output average
to network drive. This way, not only the loal SSD drive will never be
filled, but also the network activities on the LAN are spreat out more
evenly. Data collection won't slow down at all due to network performance. 

.. _multishot:

Using Multishot
---------------

Multi-shot method is perhaps the most efficient way for single particle data
collection. It can speed up quite a bit. Please refer a separate note -
**Tackle the Coma**. 
